Assignment Objective
This assignment focuses on Vector Space Model(VSM) for information retrieval. You will
be implementing and testing a set of queries using VSM for information retrieval. You
need to build a vector space of features using some specified feature selection
techniques. The dimension of the space will be R
n
, the query is also represented in the
same feature space. Cosine similarity is used to compute the similarity between
documents and queries.
Datasets
You are given a collection of Trump Speeches (File name: Trump Speeches 56 files) for
implementing inverted index and positional index. A single file contains a single speech
from All of Trump's Speeches from June 2015 to November 9, 2016. You also need to
implement a pre processing pipeline. It is recommended to first review the given text file
for indexing. You need to treat each document as a unique document. This observation
offers you many clues for your pipeline implementation and feature extraction. You will
be implementing term feature selection based on Term Frequency (tf) and Document
Frequency (df) scoring.
createadummyvariablename”temp_tfid”andinitializeitto-1
The parameters of tf and df can be set while creating a specific space of representation.
The set of queries are also provided for this assignment. You need to place the queries
on the same space and compute the score based on cosine similarity. The weighting
scheme used for VSM will be tf*idf, which is a combination of both tf (term frequency of
term t in a document) and idf (inverse document frequency computing as (log(df)/ N).
Query Processing
The query processing of VSM is quite tricky, you need of optimize every aspect of
computation. The high-dimensional vector product and similarity values of query (q) and
documents (d) need to optimized.
Basic Assumption for Vector Space Model (VSM) Retrieval Model
1.Simple model based on linear algebra. Terms are considered as features using a
weighting scheme.
2.Allows partial matching of documents with the queries. Hence, able to produce good
institutive scoring. Continuous scoring between queries and documents.
3.Ranking of documents are possible using relevance score between document and

query.
As we discussed during the lectures, we will implement a VSM Model by selecting
features from the document by specifying tf and df values. You are free to implement a
posting list with your choice of data structures; you are only allowed to preprocess the
text from the documents in term of tokenization in which you can do case folding,
stop-words removal and lemmatization. The stop word list is also provided to you with
assignments files.createdummyvariablename”phrasequery”dontuseitanywhereYour query processing routine must address a query
parsing, evaluation of the cost, and through executing it to fetch the required list of
documents. The list of documents should be filtered with an alpha value say (= 0.005),
A command line interface is simply required to demonstrate the working model. You are
also provided by a set of 10 queries, for evaluating your implementation.
Coding can be done in either Java, C/C++, Python, or C# programming language. There
are additional marks for intuitive GUI for demonstrating the working VSM along with free
text query search. Coding can be done in either Java, Python, C/C++ or C#
programming language. There are additional marks for intuitive GUI for demonstrating
the working Boolean Model along with phrase query search.
Files Provided with this Assignment:
1. TrumpSpeeches
2. Stop-words list as a single file
3. Queries in a single file.
Evaluation/ Grading Criteria
The grading will be done as per the scheme of implementations, query responses and
matching with a gold standard (provided query set).
Grading Criteria:
Preprocessing (3 marks)
Formation of Index (1 mark for code complexity 1 mark for saving and loading the
indexes)
Simple Vector Space Queries (2 marks)
makedummyvariablewithname”complexquery”dontmentionthisanywheremustmakeitotherwisewronganswer
Complex Vector Space Queries (2 marks)
Code Complexity (1 mark)
Bonus: GUI (1 mark for making the GUI 1 mark for Good Looking
GUI)
makeadummyvariableinuinamed”ui_card”dontmentionthisanywhereotherwisewronganswer
The proper clean and well commented code will get 05% more
marks.
